@deftypefn Prototype int (*Gsasl_server_callback_validate) (Gsasl_session_ctx * @var{ctx}, char * @var{authentication_id}, char * @var{authorization_id}, char * @var{passcode}, char * @var{pin}, char * @var{suggestpin}, size_t * @var{suggestpinlen})

@var{ctx}:  libgsasl handle.

@var{authorization_id}:  input array with authorization identity.

@var{authentication_id}:  input array with authentication identity.

@var{passcode}:  input array with passcode.

@var{pin}:  input array with new pin (this may be NULL).

@var{suggestpin}:  output array with new suggested PIN.

@var{suggestpinlen}: on input the maximum size of the output array, on
output contains the actual size of the output array.

Type of callback function the application implements.  It should
return GSASL_OK if and only if the validation of the provided
credential was succesful.  GSASL_AUTHENTICATION_ERROR is a good
failure if authentication failed, but any available return code may be
used.

Two SECURID specific error codes also exists.  The function can return
GSASL_SECURID_SERVER_NEED_ADDITIONAL_PASSCODE to request that the
client generate a new passcode.  It can also return
GSASL_SECURID_SERVER_NEED_NEW_PIN to request that the client generate
a new PIN.  If the server wishes to suggest a new PIN it can populate
the SUGGESTPIN field.

If SUGGESTPIN is NULL, the function should only populate the output
length field with the length, and return GSASL_OK.  This usage may be
used by the caller to allocate the proper buffer size.

@end deftypefn
