@deftypefn Prototype int (*Gsasl_client_callback_service) (Gsasl_session_ctx * @var{ctx}, char * @var{service}, size_t * @var{servicelen}, char * @var{hostname}, size_t * @var{hostnamelen}, char * @var{servicename}, size_t * @var{servicenamelen})

@var{ctx}:  libgsasl handle.

@var{service}:  output array with name of service.

@var{servicelen}: on input the maximum size of the service output array,
on output contains the actual size of the service output array.

@var{hostname}:  output array with hostname of server.

@var{hostnamelen}: on input the maximum size of the hostname output
array, on output contains the actual size of the hostname output
array.

@var{servicename}: output array with generic name of server in case of
replication (DIGEST-MD5 only).

@var{servicenamelen}: on input the maximum size of the servicename
output array, on output contains the actual size of the servicename
output array.

Type of callback function the application implements.  It should
retrieve the service (which should be a registered GSSAPI host based
service name, such as ``imap'') on the server, hostname of server
(usually canoncial DNS hostname) and optionally generic service name
of server in case of replication (e.g. ``mail.example.org'' when the
hostname is ``mx42.example.org'', see the RFC 2831 for more
information).  It should return GSASL_OK, or an error such as
GSASL_AUTHENTICATION_ERROR if it fails.

If SERVICE, HOSTNAME or SERVICENAME is NULL, the function should only
populate SERVICELEN, HOSTNAMELEN or SERVICENAMELEN with the output
length of the respective field, and return GSASL_OK.  This usage may
be used by the caller to allocate the proper buffer size.
Furthermore, SERVICENAMELEN may also be NULL, indicating that the
mechanism is not interested in this field.

@end deftypefn
